# Chapter 1 (Overture: Féerie and Theatre with Music)

Chapter 1 

Among the manuscript orchestral parts from the Théâtre des Variétés that have found their way to the Bibliothèque nationale de France, there is one set of parts that stands out for its apparently hybrid nature (Fig. 1.1).1 It contains, divided into three acts, more than 50 brief vocal numbers of the kind one would expect in a 19thcentury vaudeville: a few have original music, some recycle music composed for previous productions at the same theatre, most are based on pre-existing tunes (timbres, popular opera or operetta numbers, or songs). That the music found in these parts does not belong to a vaudeville, however, is evident from the sheer amount of instrumental music: in addition to the overture and entr’actes, the play is punctuated by numerous orchestral intrusions ranging from a single chord to a balletic divertissement in seven numbers. Indeed, included are not one but two divertissements, as in most canonic grands opéras, and dancers also perform two pantomimes (involving moving statues and mute harem guards). But music is also used, in melodramatic fashion, to underscore the stage action, as one can verify through a comparison with the printed text of the play:2 we find music for a combat scene (a fixture of melodrama);3 all the tricks that create the appearance of magic are accompanied at least by a pertinent musical gesture; and the effect of open-curtain changes of scenery (changements à vue) is amplified by music. Counting both fully fledged set pieces and short cues, music occurs over 80 times in the course of the play (Table 1.1).

Not only is Les bibelots du diable one of a handful of féeries dating from before 1870—and possibly the only one from the Second Empire—for which the music is fully preserved, but it is also an extremely successful specimen of the genre, written by two of its foremost practicioners

This set of parts, then, is likely to raise familiar questions for the music historian. Were féeries properly spoken or musical theatre? Can they really be considered spoken plays when they included operetta music performed by operetta artists? Yet how can féerie, which has actors singing timbres, fit within musical theatre, which normally has singers performing music written by a composer? Is féerie a melodrama in which people happen to sing, or a vaudeville with some background music to grease the wheels of stage illusion? Beyond these obviou

These are all perfectly legitimate questions. But féerie forces us to reconsider some of the assumptions that underlie it, making us realise that our musicological toolbox might not be well suited to 19th-century Parisian theatre. Firstly, we might be preoccupied too much with authors and works, and too little with genres and institutions. Secondly, our distinction between spoken and musical theatre (with its corollary, the distinction between actors and singers) might be misleading. And thirdly, the work/performance binary might not prove equally useful for all genres

But the relation of féeries to their social context is not just a thematic one. The ‘market’ and the ‘marvellous’ of my title are closely intertwined: féerie’s embrace of the market had as profound an influence on its poetics as Richard Wagner’s rejection of the market had on the poetics of his mature works. If Wagner’s ideal was the total artwork of the future, that of féeries can be dubbed the ‘total artwork of the present’—plurimedial works whose multiple authors had limited agency, and which call into question (to address the last of the points I have raised) the work/ performance binary.

. We should consider corpora, not single works; we should consider works condemned by the selective tradition alongside canonic ones; we should consider all the aspects of the performance, not just the verbal text (or the score, in operas); we should consider the contribution of a host of agents (performers, management, audiences) to theatre works, not just that of the creators; and we should consider theatre works as the product of an industry and as a part of a media landscape.