# Scott: Sounds of the metropolis

—intro

He calls it a “popular style” in the first para—interesting: “it had its own characteristic **techniques, forms, and devices”**

**By the end of the century, as a result of the growth of the music market and the increased professionalism in the musical world, there was a variety of popular genres, each with its own peculiar characteristics.**

**I hope the succeeding chapters will demonstrate that such a term is not inappropriate, and also make clear that I am referring to a revolution in musical style as well as genre.**

This revolution was driven

by social changes and the incorporation of music into a system of capitalist enterprise: it resulted in a polarization between the style of musical entertainment (or “commercial” music) and that of “serious” art. Nobody doubts that this fissure between art and entertainment was created in the nineteenth century

Indeed, one might argue that popular music had become a different musical language, and one that might be spoken in different dialects and with different accents.

**In the nineteenth century, nobody would expect an opera singer to perform convincingly a chanson réaliste, or assume that a musician skilled in the classical symphonic repertoire would automatically be capable of giving a characteristic lilt to a Viennese waltz.**

The popular music revolution brought forth musical idioms whose difference in both style and meaning from the classical repertoire created insuperable problems for those who were unfamiliar with the new conventions and lacked the particular skills demanded by the new styles.

I want, in this study, to analyze the musical features that made up the new popular style. My contention is that “popular” refers for the first time not only to the music’s reception but also to the presence of these specific features of style.

t is important to realize that these cultural changes mean that “popular music” cannot be directly translated into French as “musique populaire” or into German as “populäre Musik.” In French and German, the adjective “popular” retained different nuances of meaning (associated with the working class or the folk). French popular music of the commercial type would eventually come to be described as variétés françaises.

Let me very briefly (and far too simply) explain the legacy of the stylistic revolution. Dance music in Vienna provided infectious rhythms, novel orchestral timbres, and a new coloristic use of harmony (chords 6 Sounds of the Metropoli

that took on a “free-floating” major sixth or major seventh); it also employed new melodic devices (the wienerische Note). It was in Vienna that what became known as “light music” was created, and the old types of contredanses were gradually ousted by dances for couples (the waltz and polka). Blackface minstrelsy in New York provided popular music with a percussive character, a new type of syncopation, and a three-chord model—features inherited by a range of twentieth-century styles from blues to punk. Music hall in London supplied songs with a hook or catchy chorus coupled to a less memorable, narrative-driven verse section—features inherited by Tin Pan Alley, dance bands, and stage musicals. Cabaret in Paris presented songs with hard-hitting and socially concerned texts, precursors of later protest songs (for example, those of Bob Dylan) and various later forms of “realist” song (for instance, Jacques Brel’s “Amsterdam,” Radiohead’s “Creep”).

**Since a great deal of part I is concerned with general matters concerning popular music, a warning is needed about interpreting popular song as a reflection of everyday social reality. The minstrel song “The Empty Cradle” (Harry Kennedy, 1880) became less popular, not more popular, when infant mortality rose.15 More generally, it is important to recognize that high- and low-status music cannot be mapped directly onto high- and low-class consumers. There was scarcely a European ruler who did not attend a performance of Offenbach’s La GrandeDuchesse de Gérolstein. While arguments can be made for the effectiveness of different styles in articulating distinct class interests, it should not be forgotten that a French haut bourgeois could enjoy a café-concert chanson, and an English factory worker enjoy singing in Handel’s Messiah. We also need to be aware of Max Weber’s warning not to confuse struggles between status groups as struggles between classes; indeed, status groups “hinder the strict carrying through of the sheer market principle.”16 On the other hand, for those who argue there is no relation between musical taste and social class, the empirical data gathered by Pierre Bourdieu is disconcerting.17 William Weber has commented on the difficulty of defining the middle class in the nineteenth century,18 but I intend to sidestep this by inclining toward a Gramscian model in which the middle class is perceived not as a homogeneous body, but as a group composed of fractional interests.19 The field of the popular that opened up in the nineteenth century was one in which different classes and class fractions fought over questions of intellectual and moral leadership (in Gramscian terms, hegemony). This struggle concerned matters of cultural status and legitimation, and popular culture functioned frequently as an area of compromise over values. For instance, aristocratic and bourgeois interests might come together (as they often did in Paris), but the working class might adopt evasive or resistant strategies. At other times, a bourgeois bohemian fraction might have interests that coincided with those of the working class, so that more than one class would be present in a London West End music hall or a Parisian cabaret. In short, popular culture fu**

There is the problem of the meanings “popular music” has gathered to itself since the late nineteenth century, which often conflict with the term’s actual use earlier in that century, when “popular song” meant a widely known song, but not necessarily a “lesser” kind of song (some popular songs may have been seen as lesser songs, but it was not an automatic judgment). Educationalists would condemn music hall songs as rubbish, but not condemn popular song in general as rubbish (they even liked some blackface minstrel songs). A difficulty I have with Richard Middleton’s definition of popular music as, among other things, “types of music that are considered to be of lower value”20 is that it does not specify who does the considering and why their opinion counts, and it sits uncomfortably with what we know to be the case for much of the nineteenth century. Both Queen Victoria and John Ruskin, for example, loved the song “Home, Sweet Home.” Here we have a member of the social elite and a member of the critical-aesthetic elite, yet neither is prepared to condemn this popular song as music of lower value.

**plicity” is not uncommonly applied to some “serious” compositions. Thus, “serious” is the dominant term, and “light” is defined negatively against it, as music lacking seriousness, as Trivialmusik. Johann N. Hofzinser, writing in the periodical Sammler in 1833, railed, “A just indignation must seize everyone who, when Strauss plays, hears the names ‘art and artist’ desecrated by such frivolous stuff.”1**

**A crucial development occurred in the 1820s, in the dance music of Joseph Lanner (1801–43) and Strauss Sr. (1804–49). As a writer looking back on this period in the Musical Times of May 1895 declared, “Haydn and Mozart . . . left the courtly dance of the last century pretty much where they found it, but the Strauss waltz is almost a distinct creation.”8 Lanner and Strauss, and especially the latter, saw the possibility of a popular revolution in music, and created a style that was often consciously at odds with the art music of its time. It was a style that gave new meaning to entertainment music: the thesis here being that the concept of the “popular” began to embrace, for the first time, not only the music’s reception but also the presence of specific features of style.**

Stylistic Features When examining Viennese waltz style, we should not neglect the importance of nonnotated performance practices such as the anticipated second beat, the use of accelerando, strongly marked ritardandi, and so forth. They all require musical “feel,” just as do later features of popular music performance, such as “swing” and “groove.” Strauss Sr. demonstrated his awareness of the importance of popular music performance conventions that are suggestive of spontaneity and intuition rather than inflexibility and subservience to a musical score when he asked Philippe Musard if he might play with his orchestra in order to acquire an idiomatic understanding of French quadrille playing. Other countries, in turn, needed to acquire the feel of the Viennese waltz. The anticipated second beat of the accompaniment is not something that happens relentlessly—it depends on context; but the context is judged as much by feel as by an assessment of the melodic rhythm. Similarly, you have to feel that a certain pushing and dragging of tempo is appropriate: for example, sensing the need to pull the tempo back slightly and to add gentle accents to each note as the melody strides downward after having reached its high point in the third phrase of the first waltz of Josef Strauss’s Sphären-Klänge, op. 235 (1868). When New Yorkers finally got to hear a Viennese waltz played idiomatically (during Strauss Jr.’s tour), they were struck by the “life and color” in the performance: “It is really wonderful how a pianissimo or a forte, a retardando [sic] or a crescendo, an emphatic accent or other mark of expression animates, improves and heightens the effect.”23