# Smart: Traffic in voices

While the a*raction of these performances undoubtedly lay partly in the opportunities they afforded for a safely aestheticized encounter with the imagined savagery of the southern temper and the rich sonorities of Italianate voices, this essay a*empts to look past the surface pleasures of these performances, to consider the ways in which Italian voices, Italian music, and narratives of Italian experience could be transmuted into various currencies, whether measured in terms of public opinion, political power, or !nancial return.

At this point the dominant a*itude towards the immigrants and their cause was still one of condescension. In June &'(&, the Morning Herald wrote of Italians as “slaves of a foreign dominion, [who crawl] amid the magni!cent ruins of the glory of their land” and acknowledged: “It is a pity that blood has been shed; but the recreant cause of these ‘patriots’ commands but li*le respect and less sympathy from Europe.”

A key component of that integration was the school he established in &'0& to ameliorate the circumstances of young Italian immigrants, many of whom worked as street musicians or “organ boys.” Parish records show that close to half the Italians living in the Holborn neighbourhood, where most of the immigrants had se*led, earned their living as street musicians, while another ->? sold small art objects in the streets. Most of the musicians had come to London as young boys who had been entrusted#or sold#to human tra3ckers by their impoverished families in Italy.,2 Mazzini’s main objective in establishing the school was to help these young people become literate so that they might gain be*er employment. Lessons were offered each evening in reading, writing, arithmetic, geography, and dra"ing, with a special lecture on Sunday evenings, usually devoted to Italian history or religion. Instruction was not overtly politicized; but in addition to the history and literature of their homeland Mazzini aimed to teach the students that immigrants from different regions and economic positions shared a common cause#that (as one of the school’s champions put it in a le*er to the Morning Chronicle) the organ grinder from Parma was not a stranger to the vendor of statue*es from Como

Smart: Traffic in voices

Although it tells the tale of a single street musician, Gallenga’s story could almost be an allegory of Italian character and the obstacles Italians faced in achieving autonomy. Its title character, Morello, is depicted !rst as a helpless victim, sold by his impoverished family to a human traf!cker, who brings him to London to beg and play the organ. In service to the tra3cker, Morello’s moral and physical state deteriorates: his dress is more squalid every time the author encounters him, and his health is gradually but steadily undermined. Yet not cranking an organ on the streets turns out to be even worse than the degrading life of indenture. Eager to be*er himself, Morello sneaks out to a*end Mazzini’s school (which is described in accurate detail) and is caught and beaten by his master. When he runs away, he is taken in by a countess, Lady Muscavado, who adds him to her collection of luxury items:

In “Morello” Gallenga’s focus falls so completely on the sentimental and moralizing aspects of the tale that the reader learns nothing about the music Morello played or how listeners reacted, beyond the affection his songs inspired in the countess. Some such details are retailed by Henry Mayhew, whose remarkable London Labour and the London Poor contains seven interviews with Italian immigrants, three of them street musicians./$

Mayhew’s accounts are typical of writings about Italian musicians and street vendors in their preoccupation with the economic condition of the workers they depict, and his sketches o"en discuss monetary transactions. Even more than Gallenga, he dwells on the minutiae of life in the Italian-run boarding houses of Saffron Hill (Holborn), where boarders paid separately for each meal and service. From earnings of perhaps ten shillings a week, the musicians might pay four pence for a loaf of bread for breakfast, a halfpenny for a cup of tea or coffee, tuppence nightly for the bed itself, and a shilling and sixpence for a laundered shirt for Sunday.// Music was on a par with the sale of fruit and vegetables: the skills required to turn a barrel organ are almost identical to those needed to sell anything else on the streets: the ability to call up a mental map of the city, with rich and poor quarters clearly noted, and a sharp memory for the addresses where sales have been made before and where certain “products” are in demand.

Just as Gallenga emphasizes that Morello was neither musically inclined nor musically trained when he was brought to London, Mayhew’s musicians disavow musical expertise. His most obliging informant, the “Organ Man with Flute Harmonicon Organ,” says mildly, “I don’t know music at all. I am middling fond of it.”/1 Yet the Organ Man is an authority on the mechanical aspects of his instrument and on the science of squeezing the greatest possible pro!t from listeners by matching his musical selections to location, class, and taste. Gallenga writes searingly about the “shrewd” tricks and manipulations the organ boy, Morello, devises to make money, his progress through the city guided by “the map in his brain+.+.+. do*ed with golden marks.”/2 Taking a less judgemental tone, Mayhew relays in exhaustive detail how Organ Man’s earnings ;uctuate with the weather, how the physical strain of cranking the organ makes his wrist sore, and how he tunes his instrument (“it is the trumpet part that get out of tune sooner”) and updates it with new tunes#something he does only once a year because of the prohibitive expense. He even gives the name and address of the technician who adds the new tunes and explains that he also sells sheet music for the tunes he plays, at four shillings each.

In contrast to Adolphe Smith’s rigid strati!cation of high and low genres in relation to value, Mayhew’s Organ Man is refreshingly pragmatic. %e economic imperative that guides his existence leads him to value eclecticism and variety above all, although he seems in no doubt that the strati!cation of musical genres corresponds reliably to the strati!cation of class: It won’t do to have all opera music in my organ. You must have some opera tunes for the gentlemen, and some for the poor people, and they like the dancing tune. Dere is some for the gentlemens, and some for the poor peoples./: Along with the Liverpool hornpipe “%e Ratcatcher’s Daughter,” a polka, a waltz, and a Sco*ische, his organ plays a tune from Verdi’s I Lombardi (an opera that he recalls once having seen in Italy) and one from Il trovatore./< About the excerpt from I Lombardi, he muses “All organs play that piece. I have sold that music to gentlemens.”

Mazzini’s efforts to leverage the arts, and above all operatic music, to transform the political and economic realities of his compatriots were similarly malleable and contingent. Widely read essays such as “Filoso!a della musica” and “Duties of Man” pivoted on the idealistic conviction that the right kinds of culture could change the ways people thought and acted. In planning the bene!t concerts, however, pragmatism reigned su

!e Exchange Value of Italian Opera in Giuseppe Mazzini’s London ", preme. Decisions about personnel and programming were governed by popular taste, rather than by any deference to Mazzini’s lo"y programme for operatic reform. Star turns, memorable melodies, and virtuoso showpieces dominated. %e most popular tunes, in performances by star performers, became currency that could be traded for gi"s from the aristocracy and the successful merchant classes in support of the school. %e goal was to educate the organ boys and other residents of Saffron Hill to the point where they could earn a living, and, if successful, the process would almost always result in

ts idealistic premise notwithstanding, the “Filoso!a” itself was on some level a piece of marketing, although aimed at a very different audience and mode of consumption from those of the bene!t concerts. But where Mazzini’s writings assume a binary logic in which some works and styles are good, progressive, and communitarian, while others are egotistical and reactionary, the logic of the street musicians and of the bene!t concerts is based in a notion of in!nite substitution and exchange. Under this system, almost any product or experience, whether aesthetic or material, can be traded for !nancial returns that can support needy individuals, institutions, or ideas. As Jane Carlyle intuited, though, opera arias sung by celebrity singers were worth far more on this market than forty-!ve pounds of macaroni or close encounters with the charity cases themselves. the boys casting aside the barrel organ and any association with music.